>> Jason Pamental: Some resources,
Axis-Praxis is a fabulous website.
If you haven't seen this yet,
axis-praxis.org is put together by
a friend of mine, Laurence Penney.
And this is a playground.
He put this up just weeks after variable
fonts were initially launched as a way for
you to go select any one
of these blocks of text.
And there, he has a whole slew of variable
fonts that have been given to him to
include in this, so
that you can select any block,
change to different variable fonts.
It will show you all the available
axes of variation with a slider and
a number value, so
you can play around with them.
You can click on the CSS link above
the word font in font variations and
see the CSS in real-time, or
copy it into your own project.
It also exposes all the OpenType
features that are available.
So ligatures, fractions, number styles,
we'll look at a bunch of those other
features, are all accessible here too.
So it's a great tool for
you to start to see what's possible
with some of these different fonts.
The Variable Fonts site, or v-fonts.com,
is put together by Nick Sherman
as a catalog site.
So he's trying to make sure that he can
list every variable font that he sees come
onto the market, either a professional
commercial one, or open source efforts.
And if you just go to GitHub and search
variable fonts, you'll find a whole slew
of variable font projects that you can
just download and start to play with.
But there are now starting to see
some really interesting commercial
ones coming out.
>> Jason Pamental: This project on GitHub
from Monotype is one that you can download
and play with on your own system.
And what it looks like by default is it
just says drop something here up top.
And you can drag and drop a variable font
that you might have on your own system,
and it will load it up, show you
all of the different instances, and
the number ranges with some sliders.
And then give you a live,
editable text area down below so you can
put whatever text you want in there and
create your own little live text widget.
That helps you to kinda figure out,
what are the named instances?
What are the different values?
What are the low and high-end number
ranges that you can play with?
And then actually see it
with a block of text.
>> Jason Pamental: Microsoft also has put
out an intro to variable fonts website.
That's also linked in the slides.
So there's a ton of information here
with links to lots of resources and
explanation about how
variable fonts work and
what they do,
all in a really nicely designed page.
Type Network,
it's another one that I've been working on
with them to get this website launched.
This will showcase how
variable fonts work,
how you might use them in publishing, and
a bunch of fonts that they are going to
have commercially available.
>> Jason Pamental: Monotype also put
up their own intro to variable
fonts a few weeks ago, and
I had the good fortune to get
to design the demo for them.
So this page is linked from that one, and
this is using a variable font that
they released that anyone can use.
We actually will be playing
with this one as well, FF Meta.
It's a great typeface, and
they've introduced that as a variable
font that's sort of free to use for
quite a while, I think till 2019.
And they'll have other
commercial options available.
But this one has the entire weight
range and italics and the file's 84K.
I mean, it's kind of incredible
what you can get out of it.
And what I did with this
page was just try and
show the range that you can get when
you have that at your disposal.
There's another one from my friend Oliver,
put up this fantastic
site using Output Sans,
another variable font from David Jonathan
Ross, of the Font of the Month Club fame.
And this page, likewise, has a fantastic
explanation of variable fonts,
but also showcases what they
can do all within that page.
So these are great for not only getting
inspiration, and seeing what they can do.
But also passing it along to a designer
that you know, or a manager, or
anybody else on your team so
they can actually see what variable
fonts are all about in variable fonts.
And that's really the best way to really
see exactly what the technology can do.
And I've got a slew of stuff up on
CodePen that you can play around with.
But more important is that I'm showing
this to you in the Firefox Nightly build.
And if you look down below,
I have just opened up the dev tools.
There's now a three pane view and
a font pane and
it will showcase everything available in
that variable font, right in the browser.
So this is probably the most useful way,
because you can look at your own layout.
So as you're working on your site, you
actually have these tools right here that
you can play around with, all of these
sliders, with any individual element.
It will update the CSS live.
You can then just copy it right back into
your project, so it's incredibly helpful.
They're working on even
more tools in here.
Also, if there are named instances,
there will be a drop down right
there that will let you pick them.
And it will update the sliders and
the CSS values live for you, so
we'll take a look at some of that too.
But that browser is just running
rings around everybody right now
in terms of implementation of
useful things for variable fonts.
It's also incredibly fast.
If you haven't looked at Firefox lately,
in the last six months or
so, you really need to try it out.
It's really worth it.
It's a whole new rendering engine.
It's definitely the fastest thing on
the web right now.
>> Jason Pamental: In terms of fonts
that are becoming available,
when I started giving talks on this,
there were like three.
Now there's dozens and
more coming out all the time but
what a lot of people are gonna be asking
about are what about the open source ones?
So this is just a screenshot
of work being done on Roboto.
So there are a number of core variable
fonts that are being worked on so
that we'll have our variable open sans or
whatever.
I think there's a source sans variable
that's in the works and a bunch of others.
So we'll have good core
usable variable fonts that we can
start to rely on pretty soon.
And there are lots of commercial
ones that are already shipping.
>> Jason Pamental: This is just an example
of playing around with font grade in a UI
element.
>> Jason Pamental: So
giving things like a different
hover state or whatever,
that can really help draw attention to
something without being too heavy-handed.
Or changing the size and
shape of the buttons.
And this is really just
a little bit of fun.
This is Decovar in
the hands of Mandy Michael.
She's just a really fantastic
designer from Australia and
she did some really beautiful
experiments just animating things.
And again, maybe it's not necessarily
the most functional thing.
But in terms of just a way to add a little
bit more of an emotional connection,
something that's a little bit more fun,
clearly, there's some interesting things
that can be done.
>> Jason Pamental: So
that is our brave new world.
We're gonna start playing
around with stuff in code.